[GONG SOUNDING]
>>I've been talking about the
perception of the world coming
suddenly out of nothing.
You'll remember that,
in a previous talk,
I asked you to close
your eyes and listen.
And you would hear silence, and
then sounds coming right out
of that silence.
And then I suggested that you
use your eyes and see light,
shape, form coming at
you as a vibration that
is proceeding out of space.
And I pointed out that our logic
resists that because, we say,
you can't get something
out of nothing.
And that we normally
think of all
the energetic manifestations
of this universe
as coming out of the past.
We think the things
that were there already
are producing the things
that are going on now.
But I was trying to get you to
look at it in the other way,
so that you would see the
whole world starting now
instead of in the past, and the
past as a kind of echo fading
away into memory.
And I illustrated it as being
like the wake of a ship that
trails across the water
and then fades out.
But the wake is started by
the ship in the present.
And so in the same
way, I'm moving
on to the uncommonsensical
idea of the world
as a production of energy
that is beginning right now
and is coming out of the
nothing that we variously
call space and silence.
But then, naturally,
this raises the question,
how on earth could that happen?
And it has been, of course,
the usual explanation
that the world is
being created by God.
In Christian and
Catholic theology,
it is said that God creates
the world out of nothing.
And I want to
emphasize the point,
in all fairness to
Catholic and to Islamic
and to Jewish doctrine,
that it doesn't merely
teach that God, once upon
a time, started the world
and set it going like you
would wind up a machine
and then leave it alone.
All these three religions
teach that God is always
creating the world
out of nothing, now,
and willing it by
His divine energy
into being at this moment.
But now the
difficulty for us all,
I think, especially for educated
people in the modern world,
is that the
old-fashioned idea of God
has become incredible
or implausible.
That is to say, in
church or in synagogue,
we seem to be addressing
a royal personage.
The layout of a church
or of a synagogue
looks like a royal court.
There is some sort of throne.
And we address
prayers and requests
to the being represented
by the altar or the throne
or the tabernacle as if
that being were a king
and were causing this universe
in his royal, omnipotent,
and omniscient wisdom.
But then, when we take a
look through our telescopes
and microscopes, or even
when we go out in the forest
and look at nature,
we have a problem.
Because the idea of God that we
get from the holy scriptures,
the Bible, the Qur'an, doesn't
quite seem to fit the sort
of world around us that we see,
in just the same way as you
wouldn't dream of ascribing
a composition by Stravinsky
to Bach.
The style of God, venerated in
church, mosque, and synagogue,
seems completely
different from the style
of the natural universe.
And it's so hard to conceive
the author of the one
as the author of the other.
And furthermore, it strikes
most intelligent people
that our traditional religious
ideas of God are too primitive.
It seems impossible to think
that this universe could have
been authored by the
naive idea of God
as a sort of old gentleman
who lives far above the stars,
in Heaven, seated
on a golden throne,
and adored by legions of angels.
That seems a concept
almost unworthy
of the sort of universe
that modern science
has revealed to us.
In other words, I mean,
here's a picture of God.
A friend of mine, Richard
Bost, photographed this
in a church just south
of Oaxaca in Mexico.
And it shows a very primitive
Indian, Catholic imagination
of God the Father, wearing a
triple crown like the pope.
Only he's rather
young, handsome.
He's not quite the
old, gray bearded man,
the Ancient of Days.
But there is a serious
idol, Christian idol
of God the Father Almighty.
That has become implausible.
But also, for many people,
it has become implausible
that the root of the universe,
which the theologian Paul
Tillich calls the
ground of being,
that the root of the
universe can be in some way
a person to whom we can
relate in just the same way
that we relate to other
people, and furthermore,
a person who cares about us.
In the words of
Jesus, five sparrows
are sold for a farthing.
But yet not one of them
falls to the ground
without the Father knowing it.
So realize that you are of
more value than many sparrows.
In other words, God cares a
great deal more about you.
But it just baffles
our imagination
that there could be
this sort of person who
cares about each one
of us, who is totally
aware of every single thing
that we are and that we do,
and, by virtue of being
aware of us, creates us.
Of course, one thing that
is difficult about the idea
is that it's embarrassing.
We do not feel comfortable if
we are watched all the time
by an infinitely
intelligent judge.
You know how it is in
school when you're a child
and you're working
at some exercise,
and the teacher walks
behind your desk
and looks what you're doing.
Now, even if you like
the teacher very much,
you feel put off
by being watched.
And it makes you
self-conscious and awkward.
And so in the same
way, many people
opt for atheism
because they don't
want that uncomfortable
feeling that they're
being watched all the time.
It's awkward.
And if I were God,
I wouldn't do it.
I wouldn't want to embarrass
my creatures in that way.
And so I would leave them
alone for a lot of the time.
In fact, I've often thought
about this whole thing.
The kind of god
that people worship
is, of course, an
attempt to imagine
an absolutely
perfect human being.
But it's a very poor attempt.
For example, Jesus taught that
if somebody sins against you,
you forgive him.
And his disciples asked,
well, how many times do you
forgive him?
And he said 90
and 9 times, which
is our way of saying
umpteen times.
Always forgive somebody
who sins against you.
But notice that that
is required of a saint.
A saint is always forgiving.
But it's not required of God.
God will not forgive you
unless you apologize.
And you have to
grovel on the ground
if you've committed what
the Catholic Church calls
a mortal sin.
You've got to come to God in
a state of great penitence.
And if you don't
do that, you are
liable to be confined
in the dungeons
of the court of Heaven, commonly
known as Hell, for always
and always and always.
Now, I don't think that's
a very nice kind of fellow.
I mean, you wouldn't invite
that sort of god to dinner.
Because he would
embarrass everybody.
Everybody would be sitting on
the edge their chair like this.
And God would be looking
at you in such a way
that you felt you were being
seen through and through,
that all your awful past,
all your falseness and lack
of authenticity would be
completely perceptible to him.
And though he understood it,
and though he forgave it,
he would nevertheless make
you feel absolutely terrible.
Well, you just wouldn't want
that sort of company at dinner.
You may think it's
frivolous of me to say this.
But don't forget that the
pictorial image of God
that people have in the
backs of their minds,
even if you're a very
sophisticated philosopher
or theologian, that
primitive, pictorial image
has a very strong
influence on your feelings
about religion, about the
universe, and about yourself.
So it's just for that reason
that the traditional idea
of God has become
implausible to many people,
and that modern Protestant
theologians, and even
some Catholics, have
been talking recently
about the death of God
and about the possibility
of whether we could have
a religionless religion.
That is to say, a religion which
does not involve belief in God.
What, in other
words, would become
of the gospel, the
gospel of Jesus Christ,
if it were shown that
Jesus' own belief in God
were unnecessary and invalid?
What would remain
of his teaching,
of his ideas about caring
for other human beings,
about social responsibility,
and so on and so forth,
if the idea of God
simply evaporated?
I think that's a pretty
wishy-washy kind of religion.
I mean, if you're going to say
that this life is fundamentally
nothing but a pilgrimage
from the maternity ward
to the crematorium and that's
it, baby, you've had it,
I think that indicates a
singular lack of imagination.
I would like to look
at the death of God
theology in an
entirely different way.
I would like to say
that what is dead
is not God, but an idea of God.
A particular
conception of God has
died in the sense of
becoming implausible.
And I find this a
very good thing.
Because, well, it's a
principle of Jewish theology
and later of Christian
theology that it is always
a mistake, even a sin, if
you want to call it that--
and I want to interpolate
something here
as to the exact
meaning of a sin.
The Greek word in the
New Testament for a sin
is hamartanein.
And that means to miss the
point, or, as in archery,
to miss the mark.
And therefore, from the
Mosaic Ten Commandments
comes the idea that it is
a sin-- that is to say,
a missing of the point-- to
substitute an idol for God.
Now, the picture I just showed
you, as I said, is an idol.
But those primitive
Mexicans, even they
don't seriously confuse that
particular image with God.
The danger of it
is, of course, is
they may think of
God as something
like that their mind's eye.
They may think of God
in the form of man.
But the images
that have been made
of God or of the gods out of
wood and stone and in painting,
have never really been taken
seriously as actually what
God is like.
And nobody has confused
the actual image, say,
of a Buddha such as you saw at
the beginning of this program.
Buddha is, of course,
never identified with a god
because Buddha is a human being.
But these images are
never seriously confused
with what they represent any
more than a Catholic confuses
a crucifix with Jesus Christ.
So the images that are
pictures, statues, and so forth,
are not really very dangerous.
The dangerous images
of God are those
that we make, not out
of wood and stone,
but out of ideas and concepts.
You see, an idea is abstract.
So St. Thomas
Aquinas, for example,
defined "god" as "necessary
being, he who is necessarily."
Now, that is a
philosophical concept.
God is being.
But that concept is
an idol, because it
confuses God with an idea.
And because an idea
is abstract, it
seems something very
much more spiritual
than an image made
of wood or stone.
And that's just precisely
where it becomes deceptive.
Likewise, many people
think that the Bible
is the authentic word of God.
And therefore, they worship the
Bible and make it into an idol,
disregarding the
ironical remark of Jesus
to his contemporary Jews, "You
search the scriptures daily,
for in them you
think you have life."
And as St. Paul said
later, "The letter kills,
but the spirit gives life."
And so whatever you put
as an image or an idea
in the place of God,
necessarily falsifies God.
Now, a lot of
people say, I don't
think I could face
in life, I don't
life unless I could
believe in a just
and loving god.
It strikes me that that
kind of belief in God
is actually a lack of faith.
You see, the word
"belief" in Anglo-Saxon
comes from this
Anglo-Saxon root, "lief."
I would as lief.
And "lief" means to wish.
So "belief" really
means a strong wish.
When you get up
and say the creed,
"I believe in God,
the Father Almighty,
maker of Heaven and
Earth and of all things
visible and invisible,"
you are really saying,
I fervently wish
that there exists
a God, the Father Almighty,
creator of Heaven and Earth,
et cetera.
Because if you really have
faith, you don't need belief.
Because faith is an entirely
different attitude from belief.
Faith is a state of
openness or trust.
To have faith is, for
example, like when you swim.
You trust yourself to the water.
You don't grab hold of
the water when you swim.
And if you go stiff
and tight in the water
and try to catch hold
of it, you'll sink.
You have to relax.
So in the same way, when
a cat falls off a tree,
the cat doesn't go stiff all
over in a state of tension,
that is to say, a
state of holding on.
The cat relaxes.
It falls heavily, thumps
the ground with its tail,
and isn't hurt
because it relaxed.
So the attitude of faith is
the very opposite of clinging,
of holding on.
So that you could
say that a person who
is a fanatic in religion,
who simply has to believe
in certain propositions
about the nature of God
and the nature of
the universe, is
a person who has
no faith at all.
Because he's holding on tight.
And so when we sing hymns like
"Rock of ages cleft for me,
let me hide myself in thee,"
these aren't hymns of faith.
Or even Luther made such
a thing about faith.
But he wrote of
a hymn in German,
"Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott."
A mighty fortress is our God.
That's not a hymn of faith.
A person of faith
doesn't need a fortress.
He's not on the defensive.
And so in the same
way, when churches
are designed like the
royal courts of kings,
you know, in the royal court,
the king sits with his back
to the wall, which
is the position,
or used to be the
position, of the altar.
And around him he would have
his courtiers and guards.
And their place, of course,
in the church design,
called a basilica, which means
the court of a basilus, a king.
And the bishop sits at
the back in his throne,
and all his attendant
clergy stand around him
like his guards
in a royal court.
Well, why is this?
A king stands with
his back to the wall
because he rules by force.
And when his subjects and
his courtiers approach him,
they prostrate themselves.
They kneel down.
Why?
Because that's a
difficult position
from which to start a fight.
And so are we projecting the
image of a frightened king
upon the ground of
being, the godhead?
We are, you see.
Or in a Protestant
church, the furniture
all looks like a courthouse.
The minister wears a black gown.
And it's the same back
gown as is worn by a judge.
And there are pews
and pulpits and all
the familiar wooden
boxes of court furniture.
And the minister, like the
judge, throws the book at you.
He preaches the law laid
down in that other idol
of God, the Bible.
But does God need all that?
I mean, is God somebody who
takes this aggressive attitude
either of the king in the court
where all the subjects must
prostrate, or of the
judge who bangs the gavel
and says bah, bah,
bah, bah, bah?
This is ridiculous.
And a god so
conceived is an idol
and manifests the absence
of faith of all those
that worship him.
Because they have no
attitude of trust.
They cling onto these
rules, to these conceptions,
and have no fundamental
give to life.
Now, in a certain way you might
say that a good scientist has
more faith than a
religious person.
Because a good
scientist says, I want
to find out what is the case.
My mind is open to
the truth, whatever
that truth may turn out to be.
I have no preconceptions.
I may have some hypotheses.
I may have some
notions in my mind
as to what the truth might
be, but I'm going to test it.
And the test is-- I will
open all my senses to reality
and find out what
that reality is.
But then again, the scientist
runs into a problem.
Because he knows that whatever
comes to him as reality
depends on the structure
of his instruments
and the structure of his
senses, and behind the structure
of his senses, the
structure of his brain.
And that's himself.
So he has to have, back of
all that, an act of faith
in his own brain, an
act of faith in himself,
that his physical
organism or his mind
or whatever you want to call
it, is indeed reliable and will
show him reality,
truth, what is.
So unless there is a basic
and primordial act of faith
in yourself-- and you can't
ultimately check on yourself.
You have to believe your senses.
You have to believe your reason,
your logic, your intelligence.
So you have to
have faith in that,
even though you can check it.
I mean, it's not like
your mind's a radio
and you can go in and
screw in a connection
here and fix up another
connection there and so
be quite sure.
You always have to trust.
And behind all that, you
see, behind the brain,
just as I've shown you
before, behind your eyes,
there's the blank space,
the unknown, the unseen.
And therefore, one could say
that the highest image of God,
which is the unseen
behind the eyes,
the intangible and invisible,
which is space, out of which
come all the stars, we
can say yes, that is God.
But we have no image of that.
We do not know what that is.
But we have to trust it.
There's no alternative.
There's no way out.
You can't help trusting it.
You've got to.
But you see, that trust in a god
whom one cannot conceive in any
way is a far higher form of
faith than fervent clinging
to a god of whom you have
a definite conception.
And that conception
can easily be wrong.
And even if it's
right, clinging to it
would be the wrong attitude.
Because when you love
someone very much,
you shouldn't cling to them.
I don't want to hug my wife so
tightly that I strangle her.
And mothers shouldn't
love their children
so much that they strangle
them by smother love.
It comes out in the story
in the New Testament
when Mary Magdalene, who
loved Jesus very much,
she's said to have seen
him after his resurrection.
And she immediately
ran to cling to him.
And he said, do not cling to me.
It's translated in the King
James Bible, do not touch me.
But the Greek word,
haptein, means to cling to.
Don't cling to me.
Don't cling to
anything of the spirit.
Is just like, don't
cling to water.
Because the more you
grab it, the faster it'll
slip through your fingers.
Don't cling to your breath.
If I breathe in, and
hold it, and say,
oh, I got this breath now.
Better hang onto it because
breath is life, you know.
I'm going to go purple
in the face and strangle.
You have to let it go.
You let your breath out.
That's the act of
faith, to breathe out.
It'll come back.
Actually, the Buddhist word
"nirvana" means breathe out.
Because letting go is the
fundamental attitude of faith.
Now, it isn't as if Christians
haven't been aware of this.
One of the most
fundamental source books
of Christian
spirituality was written,
oh, somewhere in
the fifth century,
maybe the sixth century,
by a Syrian monk who
gave himself the name Dionysius.
I've recently
translated this book.
It's called "Theologia
Mystica," "Mystical Theology."
And you can get it from
your paperback bookstore.
This book is a very
strange document
because it explains that
the highest knowledge of God
is through what he calls
in Greek "agnozia,"
which means unknowing.
He says that one knows
God most profoundly
and most truly in
not knowing God.
That means, just in the same
way as your sight comes out
of an unseen, so, when you
know that you don't know,
you really know.
You really know because
knowing that you don't know
is a state of mind in which
you have let go of your efforts
to grasp hold of life
with your intellect.
[DRUM BEATING]